How's the weather like up there?
Pretty good. It's been clear for the last few days. It was foggy this morning. It hasn't been really cold yet.
That's a very good recording there. We'll leave it just like that. It rained down here for a whole week and now it's back to dry and hot.
I see. My son is in St. Louis and I've been getting some news of the weather in that general direction.
Generally, a lot of the questions I'm going to be asking you, you've already answered in several essays that you've written.
But our audience that listens to the show probably hasn't read most of those.
Alright. We'll check over here. Are you ready?
Yes. If you could speak just a little more loudly, I'm having a little trouble hearing you.
Is this better?
Yes. Thank you.
Okay. You're considered one of the best of the hard science fiction writers. Why is scientific realism so important in your work?
I'm not sure. I'm a good enough psychoanalyst to answer that. I just feel that I have trouble writing something unless I can more or less convince myself that it might happen.
The best example, I guess, was my attempt a few years ago to write a story for an anthology of Vampire Tales.
When I had finished it, I discovered that it was a science fiction story.
I counted for everything that happened on a scientific basis and I wasn't happy about it until I could account for them that way.
A lot of your early work was for John Campbell. Is that right?
That's right.
He was noted for his want of science fiction accuracy. Did that shape the way you threw out?
Yes. Very certainly it did. John was the one who bought my first several stories. I knew him quite well, talked to him quite often.
Well, I didn't always agree with him. We both felt that there were rules and that they ought to be followed.
What kind of rules were those?
Well, I mean rules of the universe. We were both materialists, I guess. We felt that the universe does run by rule.
And we felt that a story was most believable when it matched those rules, at least as we, meaning humanity in general, currently understood them.
How did you get started, Roddy?
Rather gradually, I was reading the stuff originally and started, I think, with the Buck Rogers comic strip and I discovered there were magazines.
I began telling the stories that I'd read in magazines to friends in the grade school playground and to boy scouts at campfires.
Then I began correcting some of the errors that I spotted in the stories and eventually began trying to write my own.
In your novel, Mission of Gravity, that one's really noted for how you designed and built the world of mescaline.
Am I pronouncing that right?
That's right.
How did you go about designing the world of mescaline?
It was mostly slide rule work. Part of it was my contrary nature.
I had read stories in which planets had extra heavy gravity, stories in which the planets had very light gravity.
It seemed sort of, of course, there could be no planet with varying gravity and I took the, of course, as a challenge.
So I went to work. I am, as I say, a rather firm materialist.
I have serious doubts in things like gravity screens and anti-gravity machines.
The only thing I could think of, which would produce such a variation, was rapid spin.
And this was before you could steal time on computers because they hadn't been invented.
I did a good deal of slide rule work and also some consultation with such astronomy texts as I could get hold of.
And I came up with what seemed to be a valid planet at the time.
There have been errors discovered in it since, I'm afraid.
Does that have a reference to the afterwards that you have in the book, Mission of Gravity, where you have what you call the game?
Yes. Somebody was playing the game.
I believe it was a group of members of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Science Fiction Society.
It's just for short. And they began taking MESTA and APART mathematically.
I understand from some of them that the planet actually should come to a sharp edge at the equator instead of a smooth curve.
But I am not a good enough mathematician myself to check up on this point.
Well, you had some heavy guns there at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
One thing I never was able to discover possibly through my own error.
How did the mescalonites speak to each other?
They used a vocal language sound. They didn't breathe as we did.
I tried to account for their having vocal apparatus by its developing from a swimming siphon analogous to those of our own squids.
This is in reference to a few things that I've read.
Some people say that your alien psychology is too human.
And then other people say that you create a very alien psychology.
How do you go about developing the psychology for your aliens?
Well, I am not sure, first of all, that an intelligent being's psychology would be all that different from the human one anyway.
It is going to depend on the being's motivation.
Presumably, the creature will be driven so as to survive.
He or she or it, or they, if they have several sexes,
are going to have drives to find food, to avoid pain.
If they do have sexes, they will have drives to use them, exercise them.
And all of those will tend to provide motivation recognizably similar to those of humanity.
I have a book that's just come out, The Nitrogen Fix, in which my alien does not have sex.
And I spent a good deal of time trying to find an alternative drive, which would be as powerful.
I think I found it, but I'm not going to go into about here.
I'd rather you brought the book and decided for yourself.
The planning part, it depended on that belief, mostly, I felt,
that the drives could be at least understood by a human being.
For those people who say that my aliens are noticeably alien, not human, in psychology,
I'm afraid I have a rather cynical answer.
My secret for making a being seem non-human is to make him act rationally.
For example, I can be fairly specific about this one.
In the sequel to Mission of Gravity, Starlight,
at one point I had one of my masternights driving one of these giant tanks along completely unknown territory.
And nothing was happening. He wanted to get somewhere.
And he gradually began going a little faster, a little faster as a human being would do.
Then he suddenly realized what he was doing and slowed down again, which is, of course, the rational thing to do.
My own suspicion is that nine human beings out of ten would not have slowed down until they'd run into something.
Hang on, we picked up a whistle here. There it went.
What caused you to write the sequels to both Mission of Gravity and Needle?
You had just finished answering that question about alien psychology,
and you had mentioned the sequels, at least the sequel to Mission of Gravity, Starlight.
I was given the specific example for...
Right.
Okay.
And I was fixing to ask you this question.
What caused you to write the sequels to both Mission of Gravity and Needle?
In a sense, I was talked into it.
I'm very uneasy about sequels and series stories in general.
My experience has been reading them, but I was always disappointed by the later ones.
I formed my opinion of what things were like, and the later stories usually changed those opinions and disappointed me.
The Mission of Gravity sequel came as a result of a conversation.
I think at one of the New York conventions, a fan said something, and I can't now remember exactly what it was,
which sounded like a good idea to use the masternights, and I built it up from there.
I can be much more specific about the Needle sequel.
There was one particular science fiction fan who was always asking me when it was going to come out.
Every time I met him at a convention, when is the Needle sequel coming? How?
Finally, he changed his tactic.
One fine day at a Philadelphia convention, he walked up to me and said,
how? You promised if I stopped smoking you would write a sequel to Needle.
I've stopped. Get at it.
Well, I had no recollection of ever making such a deal, but I couldn't spoil any such success story,
so I got to work on it.
Not very fast, but I got a little done.
Then I was telling this same story at another convention, I think at Toronto two or three years later,
and Judy Lynn Delray of Delray Books overheard me, and the next thing I know I had signed a contract.
So he got what he wanted anyway.
He got what he wanted. His bechenta from the book is dedicated.
He just called me up a couple of nights ago. He's been out of the country and just got back,
so I guess he's getting back into science fiction activities.
There's sort of a tongue-in-cheek style that you have in that short story, critical factor,
where the beings living in the earth beneath us are just as unaware of us as we are of them.
Yes.
What type of psychology and physiology did you come up with to develop a being like that that can flow through solid rock?
It was written long enough ago now, so I'm afraid I don't recall all the details of what led up to that.
The idea of having creatures not understanding or not being aware of others has been part of my basic science fiction frame for a long time.
I think it's a very likely sort of thing, though I don't like to go into anything as extreme as the fourth dimension.
The idea of something which could soak through rock, well, I have had courses in things like seismology,
although I never specialized in any of the geological sciences.
I know a reasonable amount of chemistry, and this just seemed like a perfectly possible situation to me.
And it was fun figuring out what would happen when a creature like this encountered an open space where gravity could take over.
Being that he had never felt the force of gravity before.
Which of course a fish wouldn't have either.
I may possibly have considered intelligent fish when I was planning that story, but as I say, it was so long ago now I don't really remember.
This was 27 years or so ago, as I recall.
You wrote most of your short stories early on, didn't you?
Yes.
It's been a hobby all along.
And in the last few years, there somehow seems to have been less and less time.
I've been doing more work connected with my profession of high school science teaching.
I'm currently president-elect of the New England Association of Chemistry Teachers, and I have an awful feeling that's going to take a lot of my time for the next two and a half years.
It sounds like it might take some of it, a bunch of your time.
I find Needle one of your most fascinating books.
In fact, it was one of the first science fiction books that I read, which you can sort of bracket my age from that point.
But it's been said by whom I don't know, but that a good science fiction mystery couldn't be written.
Yes, John Campbell used to make that claim, and I suspect that Needle was written at least partly to try to prove John wrong.
When it was coming out as a serial, he made one of his trips to the Greater Boston area.
The first of the two parts of the serial was on the stands then, and he began to talk about it to an MIT audience that allowed screaming, don't give the solution away.
He admitted that he was wrong about science fiction mystery as not being possible.
The detective in the Needle is a symbiote living in its host body.
That's a really unique idea. How did you formulate that idea?
Well, the idea is really not very new. The basic notion of what you might call possession has been part of the human mythology probably since long before we learned to write.
And many science fiction stories prior to Needle had had this, that or the other sort of creature entering the human body and doing various things.
The one I can remember most vividly was by Nathan Shockner, a two-part serial called Infra Universe, which appeared in the December 1936, January 1937 issues of astounding stories.
One reason that I, that good in the memory is I have the December 36 astounding open in front of me at the moment I've been reading old collection stuff.
And that had virus-like creatures moving into the human body and taking control. Again, I was more materialistic.
I didn't think that such a creature could take over as easily as was suggested in some of these stories.
And I felt that the hunter would have to have to do quite a job of work before he had any real effect of communication to say nothing of control in his host.
Yeah, I, all during my reading of the Needle I was wondering, you know, why doesn't he vibrate his ear? And of course in the sequel, that's what you have him do.
Eventually, yes, the idea was worked out.
Well, I have to admit that that idea didn't occur to me until later. We'll just have to admit that it didn't occur to the hunter either.
Ah, yeah. You and the hunter probably go along in the same thought processes as it were.
Well, yes. I'm not the sort of craftsman who can come up with a personality totally different from my own and make it sound believable.
There are people who are much better at that art than I am.
Robert Heinlein, for example, can write Stranger in a Strange Land, become practically a god to the hippies, and then write Starship Trooper and have everybody thinking he's a Nazi.
And in my opinion, neither of them reflects his own beliefs. He simply shows his skill at the character portrayal.
I can't do that. I can't come close to it.
No, but you do the best aliens I've ever read. Do you have any authors that you like or any people that you like who put together good aliens?
Well, my favorite, I think, is Paul Anderson, who has done a good deal of this sort of thing, too.
We have worked together to a certain extent. We collaborated by mail in putting together the planetary system in which his novel Fire Time took place.
I supposedly have rights to a few planets in the same system, and if time ever permits, I may write some stories about them.
Aside from aliens, do you have any authors who you like who write hard science? Or who do you think are writing good hard science?
Well, Paul still comes to mind, first of all. Arthur Clark, of course, knows his relevant space science very thoroughly, and he doesn't do silly things like having spaceships fall into the sun when their engines quit.
Isaac Asimov, although he doesn't write very much science fiction now, seldom makes really serious science mistakes in it.
A lot of the new writers, I'm sorry to say, I can't cite my name. Several of them are pretty good, but my memory for names is terrible, and it's the start of the school year, and I'm currently trying to learn the names of about 75 students of my own.
And I can't. Some of these young fellows, well, let's see. Alan Dean Foster comes to mind, but unfortunately he's made some rather serious astronomical slips.
Who else? Names don't come to my mind at the moment, I'm sorry.
I know I have the same problem. This is a bit off the beaten track, but on the same question of aliens, has anybody ever put together a good alien for the movies?
I haven't seen by any means all of the movie science fiction things. The one that was called Alien, I gather, was very impressive, but was so mostly by avoiding detailed portrayal of his or its or her nature, which of course is a perfectly good trick.
I can't think of any alien I have seen in a movie who was really believable in character, believably alien. Now, what was his name? Yoder or something like that, and the Empire Strikes Back was funny and good as far as I guess it's he went.
Who else?
Now that's pretty well. That's the only one I can think of who was very impressive. There were several unnamed species in the bar scene in the first of the shows, the Star Wars, where the disguise was good.
The arguing back and forth in a completely unintelligible language produced a very impressive and funny scene. But again, you can't really tell what the personalities of the creatures were like. They were very much like drunks in a terrestrial bar.
I think a good job was done, but I wouldn't say they were really alien. I don't know what can be done. The movie, the visual field, either movies or TV, represents quite a different problem from the writing one.
And I know just enough about it to realize what the difference is. I would question my own ability to write a good TV script or movie script, because you are depending a great deal on what the customer sees rather than on the words you can use, the paragraphs you can build to explain what the background situation is.
I don't know how that problem is solved, really.
Probably with a lot of money.
Well, that certainly helped. But I don't think money is the whole answer to a problem like that. You need somebody who has not merely an imagination, but a skill in the field. He has to have experience. He has to have knowledge, which I think probably can only come from experience.
What those visual media can and can't do, and in what ways practically they differ from the written word. And here I'm quite aware of my own limitations, and I shouldn't even try to sell what those differences are, because most of them I probably don't even recognize.
Yeah, I see what you mean now, though.
I'll just do my list of questions here.
On your current book, Nitrogen Fix, without giving away the plot, how did you come up with the idea of the Earth where the oxygen has gone out of the atmosphere, or at least it's bonded with nitrogen?
That's right. The idea itself is not new. It was used many years ago in a story called The Mightiest Machine by John Campbell, which someone invented a catalyst which permitted the direct combination of nitrogen and oxygen to nitrogen and dioxide.
Actually, such a catalyst wouldn't work, apparently, nearly as I've been able to figure out from the available free energies concerned. But with a little juggling and having life forms involved, which can balance off the increase in free energy in one place with a decrease in another, it seemed possible to me.
Also, again, I was more careful quantitatively than John was. He had the snowflakes of nitrogen and pentoxide drifting out of the sky and bursting into flame as they hit organic matter, it oxidized it, and the red-brown gases that rose when the high-oxidive nitrogen got reduced by other things like organics.
The streams fuming as the oxides of nitrogen boiled into them. There's a very impressive book, Beautiful Adventure Story, but unfortunately there isn't that much oxygen in the Earth in that atmosphere. You couldn't have made that much of the nitrogen pentoxide.
And I had to tone everything down a good deal and have the worst of it have happened in the past and try to figure out what the final results would have been, or intermediate results anyway, a couple of thousand years after things had started.
But I'd been working on that quantitatively for a long time because I can remember getting a talk on the general subject to a local college somewhere about the winter of 1958-59.
Oh, so you've been working on the basic outline of this book for a long time.
Yes, indeed.
Are you working on anything new right now?
Only in the sense that whenever I think of some idea which might be useful, I stick it on a 3x5 card and put it where I can find it again.
When the pile of cards gets high enough, I start spreading it out and seeing if they can be put into any sort of rational sequence.
School has just started in the last couple of weeks and I really haven't time to do very much of that for a while. I won't have for a few months.
I won't have time. Well, Christmas vacation will be the first time I can do very much on that line.
All right. Well, that wraps through what I wanted to ask you about.
Let me check your address here. Once we get this tape produced, I'll send you a copy of it.
Thank you very much.
12 Tomlinson Lane.
12 Thompson.
Thompson Lane.
THOMPSON.
Yeah, Milton, Massachusetts.
That's right.
Okay.
02187.
All right.
Was there anything specific that you might want to talk about?
I don't know. I get my enthusiasm and my dislikes the same as everyone else, but the political season coming up, I probably shouldn't irritate people by talking about them.
Most of my strong opinions are either scientific or anti-scientific subjects.
I happen to be very pro-nuclear. A lot of my friends are not.
I don't know what else I could do.
If I get started on that, it might go on indefinitely, and you probably wouldn't want that.
We talked not too long ago with Jack Williamson. We went out to the talents and talked with him for a while.
One of the things he was rather adamant on was the fact that he was getting a little tired of some of the ecologists saying,
well, listen, we need to do this with wind power and this power and that power, and the fact that no one has ever been harmed in a nuclear accident of any sort.
Well, I'm not entirely sure about it. I think some of the military reactors may have caused some trouble, but it's quite true as far as I know the commercial ones have not.
The thing that bothers me is that an awful lot of these people offer solar power as though it were the Panacea,
and a little bit of fairly straightforward arithmetic, starting with the fact that we use something like 2 trillion kilowatt hours of electricity in 1975,
suggests that the minimum amount of solar collecting surface at 15% efficiency, which is about where we are now, which could provide that,
and that's making awfully generous allowance for how long in the day the sun is above the horizon and how often we don't have clouds,
is something like 1600 square miles of collector, roughly the area of the state of Rhode Island.
And those collectors would have to be mounted so they face the sun all the time, which means far enough apart so they didn't shadow each other morning and evening.
And A, I'm very dubious about our being able to build anything like that amount of solar unit within the several decades.
I'm even more dubious about our being able to operate it without the usual run of industrial accidents, and I'm a little leery about the suggestion that you could possibly shadow that much countryside with no ecological consequences.
Doesn't seem to be a fair trade-off.
I'm not saying I am in favor of using the sun as much as possible, and certainly even nuclear power won't last forever, but I think that some of its opponents have gotten just a little bit unrealistic when they started talking about what we should do instead of nuclear.
This is my opinion. I could at length defend it quantitatively, but I don't think that's quite what you want on this program.
And I just feel fairly strongly about it, and some at least of the anti-nuclear stuff I hear is the most incredible bilge.
I have to admit some pro-nuclear is out of bilge too, but I don't think there's maybe a selective observation in my part, but I don't think there's quite as much of it from that side.
I just personally for myself too, I tend to agree with you because I live outside of town where we run two nuclear power plants all the time, and for the most part nobody thinks anything about it.
It seems to me, well, I have a button on my chest right now saying a real double standard anti-nuclear science run cars.
The automobile beyond any argument is many times more dangerous. It's looking at the box score.
Some people say, well, it's not a fair comparison because you can leave the automobile alone if you want, and I question this.
I don't think a person who wants to be within reach of such amenities of civilization as grocery stores and library facilities would find it as easy to avoid the automobile as he would to avoid the nuclear power plant.
Interesting.
Well, since we're not really doing a show on nukes or energy.
Right.
Well, you brought me stuff, I'm sorry.
No, that's quite all right. I hold many of the same views myself.
Listen, I appreciate your time very much. We will send you the tape here in about three weeks.
Okay. Thank you very much indeed.
Okay. We're working on some funding, whether it'll come through or not, as pure speculation, to get our show syndicated nationally.
Oh, that would be good.
And if we do, we'll probably, we're going to keep the master copy and we edit a dubbed copy into the program.
Right, good.
And we'll probably re-edit this and then put it up, make it available for the national syndicated stuff.
Good though.
And look forward to hearing a different one.
Yeah. And all of our tapes are being made available to the Science Fiction Research Association.
Oh, good.
So if they ever want to use them for anything, they'll have them there.
Okay, listen, I appreciate it once more.
Okay.
Thank you.